## Prehistory of databases

Data storing predates written language.  The very first instances of databases
can be found in form of **tally sticks**.  These counting aids store a single
number in a piece of wood or bone.  Incremental updates are possible by carving
another notch. More elaborated forms of data storage were developed in the
Neolithic when domestication of plants and animals led to agricultural
economies with increased needs to track amounts of goods.

**Clay tokens** for counting goods appeared in ancient Near East in the 8^th^
millenium BC. Various kinds and measures of goods such as barley or sheep were
represented by marble-sized pieces of clay in different shapes. The number of
token types, precursors of modern data types, increased with the complexity of
products and societies [@SchmandtBesserat1996]. Around 3500 BC the first cities
of Mesopotamia developed a method to store sets of tokens in sealed clay
envelopes that eventually led to the invention of writing: a hollow ball of
clay called **bulla** was filled with tokens that represented an obilgation or
claim and it was fired to avoid tampering. Sometimes the tokens were also
impressed on the surface of the envelope to account the content of a bulla
without breaking it.  This makes clay bullae the first examples of databases
with database index. 

At some point people realized that the impressed copies of tokens were enough
to store their represented values. Around 3200 BC bullae were replaced by
simple pieces of clay with impressions of token shapes and token shapes were
replaced by sign of similar shapes and other inscriptions written with a
stylus. During third millenium BC writing parted from representation of
administrative values to representations of names, words, and eventually
phonemes with the advent of cuneiform script.

The full history of writing is more complex for sure. Writing was later
invented indepedently at least two times (in China and in Mesoamerica) and
multiple factors had an impact on its development. Still it is worth to note
that one of the roots of writing systems stems from two characteristics which
also define data today: first its primary use for accounting and second the act
of copying representations that fully replace original signs.

![Clay bullae, tokens and cuneiform script ([from an exhibition] at the University of Chicago Oriental Institute)](clay-envelopes.jpg)

[from an exhibition]: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AClay_accounting_ball_with_calculi%2C_counters%2C_and_evolution_of_cuneiform_-_Oriental_Institute_Museum%2C_University_of_Chicago_-_DSC07070.JPG

